
Bonds are securitised loans that may be bought or sold before they are repaid. For the most part they consist of predictable future cash flows, coupon (income) payments and a final redemp- tion payment. Bonds are issued by governments (government issues), normally in their own currencies and by companies (corporates or non-government issues). The key feature that dis- tinguishes non-government debt from government debt is a higher level of default or credit risk. Credit risk is a function of the credit quality of the issuer. The lower the credit quality of a bond, the greater the premium investors will require (yield spread) over the equivalent government bond.

Governments have the ability to raise cash to pay coupons and principal, either by taxation or printing money. Non-government issuers or governments issuing in currencies other than their own vary widely in their ability to make payments and this is recognised in credit ratings assessed by credit rating agencies, as shown in Table 2.5. The credit ratings measure the relative probability of an issuer defaulting. An issuer is in default if any payment is missed or delayed.

Developed market bonds are issued by governments and corporates of developed markets; emerging market bonds are issued by governments or corporates of developing markets. The emerging market debt market totalled $2.5 trillion in 2018,5 2.4% of the total global bond markets. Over 50 countries are classified as emerging markets; many have liquid markets for bonds denominated in US dollars or other developed market currencies. Around 30 emerging markets also have local currency bond markets. Emerging markets typically offer higher yields to compensate investors for higher risk.

Conventional bond coupon and redemption payments are fixed, and inflation erodes the real value of these payments. Inflation risk can be reduced by investing in inflation-linked bonds which have their coupons and final redemption amounts determined by a specified measure of inflation. As of 2019 the inflation-linked bond market totalled $3.1 trillion,6 mostly govern- ment issued with only a few corporate issuers.

As of August 2020, the overall size of the global bond market is estimated to be $128.3 trillion,7 68% of which is sovereign, supranational or agency (SSA) issuers and 32% corporate. Of the $87.5 trillion SSA bond markets, $22.4 trillion is US, $19.8 trillion is China and $12.4 trillion is Japan. Of the $40.9 trillion corporate issuers, $10.9 trillion is US and $7.4 trillion is China.