
Hi, this is Michael Jones, Chairman and CEO of Caravel Concepts. Welcome to Market Insights, our commentary on financial markets and economic events. Let's get started. This week, we're going to continue our periodic series on fundamental concepts in investing. These are the things that we think that every investor needs to really understand as they work with their financial advisor, and devise a financial plan for their lives investment goals. Now, we talked about specific concepts of investing, like price earnings ratios and other valuation concepts. This week, we are going to talk about probably the most important numbers that impact investors when they really get serious about investing. And they decide that I'm not going to be sitting there speculating on what's going to happen with GameStop, I'm not going to be sitting here hoping that Tesla goes up another 50%, I'm ready to sit down with an advisor and put together a serious asset allocation that fits within my overall investment plan, I'm going to express what I hope to achieve with my money over the next 10, 20, 30, 40 years, I'm going to put together a portfolio strategy that it's going to help me achieve it. Now, when people engage in that kind of serious investment exercise, there is something that determines whether that exercise is going to be successful, or potentially disappointing. And in many instances, it's never a part of the conversation that they have. And that is capital market assumptions, also known as cmas. And the reason why these things aren't typically talked about is because it gets complicated, it gets mathematical, and it's easier just not to talk about it and assume and hope that everything's gonna be okay, that all the pointy headed, you know, wizards in the back room have done the job correctly on capital market assumptions. We think that's wrong, because there is a lot of disagreement in the investment industry, about the right way to do capital market assumptions. And depending upon which approach is taken as you develop your investment plan, as you put together your asset allocation, you could get very different results. And we think you ought to know at least enough to ask the right questions to your advisor to make sure you know what they believe about the right way to do capital market assumptions, and make sure that you believe the same things that they do. So let's get started. So as I said, capital market assumptions are the key assumptions that live under every single solitary asset allocation model, and every single solitary planning software tool. Alright, what do cmas do? We'll see amaze determine in the software down inside the mathematical boiler room, they determine the key elements of every investment part of your portfolio. What is the expected return for large cap stocks for small cap stocks, for international stocks for investment grade bonds for high yield bonds for gold for commodities for Bitcoin, whatever it is that you might want to include in your investment strategy, and in your long term gold plan? All right, there has to be an expected return for that. Right. So cmas determine the expected return for every asset class that's in the strategy. Right? They also determine the downside risk. And when we say downside risk, that's just another way of saying when we say expected return, we're pretty sure that whatever the return is, it's not going to be the expected one. So for example, a lot of times you will hear that the real return for large cap stocks is going to be somewhere between six, six and a half percent. Adding inflation number on there. You might also hear large cap stocks return about 9% 10%. Alright, those are the expected returns for large cap stocks. But no one expects large cap stocks to kind of come in at nine to 10% each and every solitary year. There's downside risk there the downside risk measures, how possible is it that the expected return is going to be wrong? Alright, and why? And let me also be clear that the expected return as we found out over the last 18 months, markets can be way better than the long term average as well as worse. So why do we focus on downside risk? Because no one ever seems to be mad. When you say By the way, our expected return was nine. And it was actually 15. No one ever seems to get mad about that. But if we say the expected return was nine, and you actually lost 15%, people tend to be a little more upset. So we really focus on downside risk. So for every different asset in the plan, large cap, small cap, developed international bonds, there has to be an expected return. And then there has to be a risk measure that lets us know how big a dispersion around that expected return, there is likely to be. All right. Then the third thing that capital market assumptions determine is the benefits that you get from diversification. And that's expressed from a mathematical term called correlation. All right, and what this means is, is simply that, how much are you likely to lower your downside risk, because you don't all have us large cap technology stocks that tend to go up and down together, you've also got some, you know, automotive stocks, you've got some international stocks, you've got small cap stocks that don't behave exactly like large cap stocks, you've got bonds that behave completely differently from stocks, you've got gold, how much benefit you get, from all these things that don't go up and down exactly together. That's measured by correlation that your benefits from diversification. Alright, now, as I said earlier, the reason why we think it's really important that investors understand these concepts is because there's tremendous disagreement. And you might think, well, I'll just go to a big, large, respectable investment firm, and then I'll know that this is going to all be taken care of, well, the two largest investment firms, BlackRock and Vanguard completely disagree about the right way to do capital market assumptions. And we'll talk about the two different frameworks that they advocate, one run 6,000,000,000,001 runs 5 trillion that's bigger than most countries, they both probably know what they're doing. And yet, they both have very different approaches to these key assumptions in their planning tools and in their asset allocation strategies. And those very different assumptions could mean very, very different things for your wife, and your goals. And I'm just talking about the top two, go to the number three, number four, number 10. Number 5000. There's lots and lots of disagreement about the right way to do this. So first thing we want you to take away is, these assumptions are really important. And you need to know what they are, before you buy into the plan and the asset allocation that an advisor presents to you. Second thing is we want you to understand the two big schools of thought that drive this process, make sure you understand it, because depending upon which side you're on, it could be very, very different planning results from your tools. Alright, so first of all, one of the things we need to make sure we under we also talked about is time frame. Because these assumptions, it's very, very different if we're talking about the next year, or the next five years, or the next 10 years. What and the reason why that's really, really different is because if I said that Vanguard and BlackRock disagree completely about how to do capital market assumptions, and that's not exactly true, because they both agree about assumptions for the next year or two. Markets are incredibly random. And there's a huge amount of downside risk, or over the next couple of three years. All right. And they had no idea whether markets are likely to be going producing great expected returns, or bad expected returns over the next year or two. because things are just random Who would have thought that there would be a Coronavirus that would come into the world and cause the markets to fall 30 40% in a couple of weeks, no one? And then who would have thought that the Fed would pour on the money and print lots of stuff, and then suddenly the markets would bounce back? 50 60%? I'll say a few people did that because we wrote about that. But the point is, is that only a short period of time. Markets are really, really, really random. And both and almost everybody agrees about that. You will find some people say no, no, no, not me. I've got a crystal ball. I know exactly what's going to happen over the next 1218 months. If you really believe it, go for it. But for the most part, when we talk about the disagreements, there are disagreements about long term returns, returns over the next 510 1520 years. And that's really important because If you think about a lot of things you want to do, if you've got kids you want to Senator to college, when they turn 18, that might be 510 years out. If you are older than that, like me, and you're looking to retire, I hope to be around 3040 years from now. So that means that returns over the next 10 2030 years are really big and important in terms of the kind of retirement I can aspire to have. Alright, so those long term returns really, really important. And it's in the long term returns that everybody disagrees. Alright. So what do you disagree about? So let's talk about, we're going to talk about two asset classes, the really easy ones, large cap stocks, and we're also talking about investment grade bonds. All right, this looks like just a complete bunch of noise and with a big ol red slash in the middle. But there's actually a little pattern here, that that's that if you look carefully, you can see, and it helps understand the difference between what Vanguard believes about financial markets, as opposed to what someone like maybe BlackRock might believe. Okay, so this is, and by the way, when we do this, when the when the videos posted, we're going to pop post the actual data, so you don't have to look at my terrible, terrible drawings. But I wanted to draw it up here so that I can interact with it. All right. Now, what this is, is since about 1870, we have pretty good data for how big companies large cap stocks to companies, you've heard of IBM, Facebook, Ford Motor Company, General Electric, at&t, companies that are really big, had some of them go back a long, long, long time. Alright, if you go back to 150 years to see how these cut how these stocks have behaved, alright, you can come up with the long term average return over inflation, for 150 years has been very consistent at somewhere between about six and six and a half percent. And there can be there's some arguing as to where it is in between those two levels. But that's not the big disagreement. That's not the big point. All right. The big disagreement, and the big point is, this number has been super stable over the last 150 years, as long as you're looking at 30 to 40, year time frames. Right? When you look at 510 year timeframes, well, the numbers have been as bad as minus 5%. And it is amazing as plus 15%. And sometimes a little better than that over like 10 year periods of time. All right. So if you just got to put your money away and come back in 40 years, well, I'd say this is probably the safest assumption you can make. It's pretty, pretty good for the last 40 or 50 years, or for the last 140 550 years. But for things that you want to do over the next five years, 10 years, even 15 years. Well, there's some disagreement about what you should assume about the expected return. If you're looking at Vanguard, Vanguard says markets are random. And there's no telling whether you're more likely to have a good 10 year return or a bad 10 year returns absolutely random. So we're going to always assume that you're going to get somewhere between six and a half, six and six and a half percent. That's going to be our expected return. And of course, we're going to recognize that there's some downside risk to that we could be wrong. But our expected return, we weren't returning, it's really going to drive your your investment plan and your asset allocation strategy. It's probably always going to be somewhere in this number. All right. Meanwhile, other investment firms and well Yeah, but you know, what, if we organize the data, if we take 10 year returns, real returns returns over inflation for the last 150 years, and we organize them and we say let's put all the times when cyclically adjusted p ease. If you don't know what that is, you can go to our video on p e ratios. But this is a way of judging whether stock markets are expensive or cheap, relative to long term history. All right. And if we take all the times when cyclically adjusted p E's were really below average. Really, the market was really cheap, based upon cyclically adjusted p e, which is also by the way called Shiller PE. What we find is is the average for those periods times just as periods of time when the market was really cheap, the average was it six, six and a half. It was 10. All right. And if we look at all those times, like right now, when the cyclically adjusted p e was 35, maybe 40. You know, the average wasn't six, six and a half then either, you know, it was more like minus 2%. So what some firms do is, instead of doing what Vanguard does, and says, markets are random, we're always going to assume we get the average return. Some people say, Well, I'm only going to expect the average, if I pay an average price. If I'm paying a way below average price, like you did in late 2008, and early 2009, well, I'm going to expect way better than average returns. And if I'm paying a really, really, really expensive price, like you are right now, in 2021, and the way you did in 2000, and in 1929, that I'm not going to assume I'm going to get six, six and a half, I'm going to assume I might lose 2%. Or in the case of where the markets are right now, it's just about right at zero. Do you see why this is super important. The number of life goals that you can achieve over the next 10 years is incredibly different, depending upon whether you're assuming markets are going to be six, six and a half, or you assume they're going to be zero. This is really important for investors to understand, because the plan that you get, and whether you think that plan is likely to come true, is entirely dependent upon the capital market assumptions that your advisor plugs in. And I want to be really, really clear, this is not about right and wrong, because Vanguard would say, okay, for that short period of time, 150 years we have this relationship came true. That's but if you actually look at the number of independent 10 year periods of time you had over the last 150 years, you got 15. Any mathematician will tell you, you can't make statistical inferences from fifth tene observations. So don't give us any of this noise in this, you know, price matter stuff. I know, this is random. Now, the contrary to that is yes, you are right, we cannot statistically prove that if you pay a low price, you get a better return. And if you pay a high price, you get a lower return. But it makes common sense. And for the limited amount of data that we have. It seems to work. And really importantly, people who said markets are super cheap in 2008, I think we could get 10%, maybe more over inflation. Everybody that said that back in 2008 was right. And everybody back in 2000. You say wait a minute, we're at the same valuation as we were in 1929. For us large cap stocks. Well, we're at the same age in 1929, you got zero to minus 2%. Over the next 10 years, we think you're going to do terribly in stocks from 2000 to 2010. And lo and behold, that was right to Now does that mean that this is right now you can't statistically proven, which is why Vanguard and quite frankly, the vast, vast, vast majority of people who do asset allocation and planning, since you can't statistically prove that this, this line exists. Most people say I'm going to pretend doesn't. And I'm always going to assume that because my lawyers Tell me if I put in the document that it's always the long term average return. That's easy to put in. It's easy to protect ourselves from any losses. And by the way, for most since most of these planning tools have come into existence, it hasn't mattered. Because markets had done wrong. I said, we focus on downside risk, because if you get better than expected returns, nobody complains. Well, that's been the experience of the last 1015 years since a lot of these tools have been in place. And so no one's too terribly upset because the markets have been much better than this six, six and a half. The challenge becomes is what will the next 10 years look like? Because importantly, back in 2000 when large cap stocks were priced to give zero value stocks, international stocks and bonds were all priced to give 589 percent returns. And that's what they did. So remember the benefits of diversification and not having all your eggs in one basket and having something besides large cap stocks in your portfolio? Everybody who did that define while large cap stocks made no money between 2002 1010 because there were other things in your portfolio, that did just fine. Well, now, we'll switch to the next big asset class with respect to bonds, investment grade bonds in night in 2000. Were yielding seven 8%. Right now, they yield about two. All right. Now, if you believe that markets are random, will the long term average return for bonds has been about 5%? since World War Two, alright. So if I'm going to assume 5% for bonds, then, and I've got 6% for equities, Hey, that looks like pretty good life for me. And things can do very, very well over the next 10 1520 years. But using that other lens, that price matters lands. Now in this case, we're not talking about price earnings ratios, we're just talking about very simple starting yield. And historically, periods that you began with a 5% yield, your average return has been, you'll be shocked to know about five peers began with 9% yields, well, average return was about nine. And this isn't hard to understand, because these are bonds, they call them fixed income, because the vast majority of your turn comes from the interest payment that you get on the bond and the reinvestment of that interest payment. All right. And that doesn't mean you can't get price appreciation over the long over over short periods of time. But a 10 year bond after 10 years matures, and your capital gain goes to zero. Right? So there's some mathematical reasons why the starting yield could matter a lot. And here's the important point. Right now, for the first time, probably maybe in human history, most bonds are yielding 2% or less. There's a lot of bonds international bonds that have a negative yield. That is look is minus 1%. Alright, so whether you believe markets are random, and you're going to assume the long term average return is what you're going to get from bonds. Or you believe that, you know, starting yield is really important. And starting with maybe a 2% yield, which if I subtract out inflation, zero, this subtract out inflation. These are very, very different numbers. And again, my point is not to tell you that one is right or one is wrong, I guess you might have kind of deduce what I kind of believe is the right way to do it. But nonetheless, there's no question you cannot statistically prove which of these numbers is right. You have to make a common sense judgment as to which framework makes the most sense to you? And which one do you want to bet your investment goals your life plan on? And the concern that I have is that most people are making this bet, but they don't know. They never asked Tell me about your capital market assumptions. Tell me what you think large cap stock stocks are going to do over the next 10 years. Unknown Speaker 23:50 What do Michael Jones 23:51 you think bonds are going to do over the next 10 years? What have you plugged into your computer? Let me know what you're assuming. So that I can make sure that as I plan for my life, I plan for educating my kids having a comfortable retirement, maybe having a nice vacation every now and then, as I save for these goals, I need to know what the machine is assuming about market returns. So I know that I feel comfortable with the assumptions you're making, so I can feel comfortable that I'm going to make those those dreams those goals come true. Thanks for joining us for Market Insights. We hope you found it informative. If you did, can you like the video and share it with your friends. Also, if you'd like more of our research, you can reach it at Caravelconcepts.com, and you can subscribe to our videos at the link below. Thanks Transcribed by https://otter.ai