Many portfolios implement simultaneous investment strategies by dividing their investments into different subportfolios, each designed to profit from a particular perceived market opportunity. These can vary in complexity from the simple (go long Russia) to the complex (volatility plays, yield curve barbell trades and the like). 

## Defintion
The overall return of the portfolio is generated by the return of all its underlying strategies, and the decomposition of a portfolio’s returns by investment strategy (as distinct from market sector or risk) is generally called [[strategy tagging]].

In principle, the calculation of returns from each strategy is straightforward, and only requires standard performance measurement tools. If one regards the holdings assigned to each strategy as a separate subportfolio, then the return of that subportfolio will show the value added by the strategy.

In practice, few managers have successfully implemented strategy tagging systems. The difficulties are largely due to workflow issues and the mechanics of logging individual trades against the correct strategy.

A particular difficulty is that some trades may involve one security but multiple strategies. For instance, if Strategy A requires the purchase of 500 bond future contracts, while Strategy B requires the sale of the same number of contracts, then the net result is that no physical trade need be made; yet each strategy requires a dummy trade, and the deal entry system should allow such trades to be recorded.

Strategy tagging is closely related to attribution but does not require any of its underlying machinery. Some managers regard strategy tagging analysis as more valuable than attribution analysis.