[The Tim Ferriss Show Transcripts: Roelof Botha — Investing with the Best, Ulysses Pacts, The Magic of Founder-Problem Fit, How to Use Pre-Mortems and Pre-Parades, Learning from Crucible Moments, and Daring to Dream (#618) - The Blog of Author Tim Ferriss](https://tim.blog/2022/09/01/roelof-botha-transcript/)

----

### Extremely Goal Setting, tracking

> **Roelof Botha:** That is accurate. When I joined Sequoia, it was clear that if I wanted to make it as a partner, you needed to produce meaningful gains and I’d set myself the goal of producing a billion dollars in gains for the partnership, because that would mean that I’d made it at some level. And so 10 to the nine, which is a billion, was my shorthand of reminding myself what I was striving for.
> 
> **Roelof Botha:** I thought I needed — there’s a concept in psychology called the Ulysses pact, which is this idea that in the method of Ulysses, he wanted to hear the sirens. So he had all his soldiers, all these sailors, wax up their ears, tie them to a mast, and that way they could sail past and he could hear the sirens and they wouldn’t succumb to them. And so in psychology, the Ulysses pact is this idea that you make a pact with your future self, knowing that your future self is going to be weak.
> 
> And so my technique for doing this, not having read about psychology yet was to put notes in front of my desk, on the door, leaving my room and candidly all over my room, reminding me of what I was aiming for. And in high school, it was to be the top 10 in my state at the end of high school. At college, it was to be number one and I would just put all these reminders of what my goals were. So if I was tempted to get up to go make a cup of tea or watch television or take a break, I would just see what I’d written to myself. And I’m reminded of what I need to do if I want to achieve what I want to achieve in life.
> 
> **Roelof Botha:** I still use some of those. I mean, when I was at Sequoia, as you pointed out earlier, I had the 10 to the nine. I try to keep track of how I spend my time. When I was in college, I would literally write down the time that I started studying down to the minute. And then I’d write down the time that I got up so that I would have an accurate tally at the end of the day of exactly how much time I actually spent studying instead of just thinking that I was studying and just loafing around the house, doing nothing. And so I use Evernote to do that. I organize key things that I want to accomplish for Sequoia and for each of the companies that I work with. So I always have this running list of what are the key things you need to focus on the most important, the three most important things you need to accomplish for a given company over the next, say six months, as a reminder of the most important things.

----

### Think long term (more than a quarter)

> **Roelof Botha:** I think it did honestly, as I said earlier, the actuary degree is about financial engineering, sort of the mathematics of finance, if you will. And so in a very practical sense when I was at PayPal, the techniques I’d learned were useful in understanding the fraud problem that was latent at PayPal. And we were able to catch our fraud challenges months before others did. And as part of the reason that PayPal survived. So a bit of a twist of history that training actually was very specifically helpful in that situation. But this idea of thinking long term, there’s a great article or a concept about the time span of discretion, what’s the horizon over which somebody thinks and plans. And I think part of what we try to focus on, it’s a part of what I think has made me a decent investor is just trying to think much longer term, not just thinking quarter to quarter or a year out, but thinking about the possibility of what might happen with companies down the road.

----

### A way of delaying difficult decisions about what might happen in your career, it’s a play it safe decision. It’s not a risk seeking decision.

> **Tim Ferriss:** Yeah. I’m not going to even make an attempt to separate those. I don’t think I can do it in my own life, so I won’t even presume to be able to do it for anybody else. I would love to ask you, and we’re going to bounce around a lot because I don’t want to do this chronologically. I wouldn’t do that if we were just having wine over dinner. So I’m just going to follow my interest here and then perhaps we’ll jump back to PayPal. So the first question I suppose is somewhat chronological, under what circumstances would you recommend to a young, would-be entrepreneur that they go into consulting, or would you generally advise against that path?
> 
> **Roelof Botha:** I would generally advise against that as a career choice. I chose to work at McKinsey. I don’t regret the decision I made, but for me it was again, an opportunity to work with an international firm. Remember I worked at McKinsey from ’96 to ’98. So South Africa just opened up from sanctions. We’d had sanctions from 1985 till 1994. And so the company, the country was starved for international talent. And so this international firm shows up. I could learn from people from all over the world and they would give me an opportunity to either study or to work abroad.
> 
> So that was a lot of the magnetism for me to join McKinsey at that time. I think if you’re already in the US, go do something a little bit more direct. It would be my advice. I mean, there the best business school is actually being in business. Actually going to join a company and actually experiencing what it’s like. So if that’s your ambition and if you want to be a consultant, there’s nothing wrong with that. But I think as a way of delaying difficult decisions about what might happen in your career, it’s a play it safe decision. It’s not a risk seeking decision.

----

### 2 x 2 metrics that we earn money (exceptional but challenge)

> **Roelof Botha:** So Don Valentine is one of the fathers of Silicon Valley. One of the fathers of venture capital. Don grew up in the semiconductor business. He was a national and Fairchild semiconductor back in the 1960s. And he started Sequoia capital in 1972. And we should get back to this later, but he made a very important decision calling it Sequoia Capital and not Valentine Capital.
> 
> Don had an amazing career as an investor. He backed Apple when a lot of people were unsure about backing a barefooted, not well-dressed, Steve Jobs. He backed Atari. He backed EA. He backed Oracle, Cisco, and the list goes on. He had a remarkable track record as an investor. And when I joined Sequoia, he was still around, still alive. He passed away two years ago and very early on, he pulled me aside and he said, “There’s a two-by-two matrix of people we get to invest in. Exceptional, not exceptional, easy to get along with, not so easy to get along with. Your job today, Roelof, is to figure out in which of those four quadrants we normally make money.”
> 
> ...
> 
> **Roelof Botha:** Well, I think you have an intuition for it. It’s exceptional, not so easy to get along with. The reason it’s — when you think about the founder prototype or personality type, most of us encounter challenges in the world and we just let it go. “This is difficult. This doesn’t work. This frustrates me,” and you just go, “Ah, whatever.” And you move on to the next thing. Founders are these people who don’t accept the way the world is. They want to change it. They encounter a frustration and they do something about it. Going back to the Cisco example, the founders of Cisco were the heads of the computer departments for computer science and the business school at Stanford. And they were on different networks. So they could send primitive electronic mail within departments, but not across campus. And the two of them were romantically involved and were getting tired of walking across campus to see each other. They wanted to — I’m not kidding you! This is the first internet love story.
> 
> ...
> 
> **Roelof Botha:** And so the founding inspiration for Cisco was connecting the networks of the computer science and business schools at Stanford. And that’s the founding story instead of just accepting the status quo. And so there’s so many other companies we are backed with, this is the example, right? Jack and Jim started Square because there was a lost sale. I mean, these personal frustrations are just incredibly powerful. So when you think about a person who wants to take on the world and doesn’t just accept it, that tells you a lot about what the founder is like.
> 
> **Tim Ferriss:** Right. And they’re highly likely to push back on anything that I would imagine that they don’t feel is fully aligned with the change that they want to leave in the world or impart to the world. So if you want to continue. Actually, I would love to hear you continue. So what are some other characteristics that could be related to the exceptional, not so easy to get along with, or they could be separate that you have identified within the data set of hits from Sequoia, where you’ve made money and by you, I mean, Sequoia?
> 
> **Roelof Botha:** Well, first it starts with an authentic identification with a problem. I think when that founding inspiration, because if you’re under start a business for the sake of starting a business it’s so hard. There are so many challenges on the way to building a successful company. If you’re doing it for the wrong reasons, you’re going to wilt. You simply won’t persevere. But if you’re deeply motivated by what you’re doing, you’ll keep going and you’ll overcome obstacle after obstacle. And so that to me is one of the key starting conditions is founder-market fit, founder-problem fit. I love asking a founder when I meet them, “How did you come up with this idea? What was the eureka moment where something snapped and you wanted to address this problem? And what is it about the current solutions that you must have evaluated that frustrated you, that you didn’t think was good enough?”
> 
> And then the next one is “What’s your unique and compelling value proposition? So, having evaluated alternatives and deciding to build something, why do you think what you’re building is so distinct that it has a chance of flourishing and becoming a real business?” So I can tell you one specific story. There’s a founder, Matt Rabinowitz. He and I met in high school in South Africa in 1987 at a nerd camp. It was actually called an academic vacation school. But I mean, that’s just a very nice way of saying nerd camp.
> 
> And he’s absolutely brilliant. He was gold medalist in our national science Olympiad. He came to Stanford, he studied physics, electrical engineering. And in 2002, his sister had a baby that died within a week of birth. And he was shocked at the state of prenatal testing. And he went back to Stanford and he learned everything he could about biology and genetics and started this company, Natera, where I’m still on the board 15 years later, we made a million dollar seed investment in him in 2006, just an idea. And today they deliver millions of tests to help people have healthy families, but it started with an incredibly authentic inspiration for him, which is seeing what his sister had to deal with.

----

### Talk less, be a good Listener 

> **Tim Ferriss:** I’ve never heard the elegance of this phrase you used before, the founder-problem fit. And I am just a tourist in the startup world compared to your immersion as an entrepreneur, operator, and investor. But if I look back at all of the angel investments I’ve made, the founder-problem fit is the defining feature of any of the hits. Not product-market fit, which may also exist, but in terms of the hierarchy of weighted importance, it’s this founder-problem fit. That’s a fantastic phrase. What else have you learned or did you learn rather from Don Valentine? And it could just be anything that you observed in him, attribute, behavior, habit, or otherwise, but what are some of the takeaways from having spent time with him?
> 
> **Roelof Botha:** Incredibly good listener. If you think about the stereotype, maybe, of an investor who’s fast talking and needs to be heard? Don was very comfortable sitting for an hour and just listening and absorbing. And then he was very precise with his questions, precise with his notes. I remember receiving a note in my inbox from Don. I was confused initially because there was no to or from, so I didn’t know who it was who’d written me this note. So I walked around the office saying “Who left this for me?” And people looked at it and said, “It’s written in green ink; it’s Don.”
> 
> So Don had exclusive use of green ink in the office. No one else was allowed to use a green pen. He loved the color of money. But he would take a full page and there’d maybe be 10 words on the page. And they were just so incredibly concise in describing the feedback that he wanted to give about a company or when he interviewed people. I saw some of his interview notes about people. Instead of writing two pages of notes about the interview, it was just so crisp and on the point. And so his ability to distill things very concisely is incredible.


----

### the practice of pre-mortems and pre-parades - contemplate, write down your pre-mortem and pre-parade (every year)

> **Tim Ferriss:** You mentioned earlier the question of “What happens if this goes right?” And I’m paraphrasing, but what does this look like, say five, 10 years down the line, even more, if this goes right. Could you speak to the practice of pre-mortems and pre-parades, if I’m getting the term correct?
> 
> **Roelof Botha:** Correct. It was actually a technique that I picked up from Larry Summers.  Former treasury secretary Summers is on the board with me at Square and he actually joined pretty early. He’s been on the board for almost a decade with me now. And he posed this as a challenge to the management team at Square. 
> 
> “Imagine things go incredibly well over the next three or five years.Actually, write it down. Don’t just think about it, write down. What does that look like? What does success really look like? What does the company look like? What have you achieved? Which markets do we operate in? Which products have we shipped? Then go write a pre-mortem. Things didn’t go the way you wanted to, what does that look like?” And so we’ve taken that concept. We actually use it in our investment memos. So for every investment we contemplate, we write a pre-mortem and a pre-parade.
> 
> And when we’ve had strategy offsites for ourselves, for the Sequoia capital investment team, we did this too. We had a pre-mortem, we literally said 20, 30 autopsy of Sequoia capital and what went wrong. What are all the things are going to cause us to not be a great firm in the future. And the value of this exercise again, back to the insights from Don, it really crystallizes first order issues. Because you can spend all your time scurring around doing all the busy work, if you’re not focused on the things that’ll really compound and matter over the next five to 10 years, you’re missing the boat and it’s the urgent important trade off. It’s all those things woven into a very practical exercise.

----

### You’re only as good as your next investment. Never rest on the past. 

> **Roelof Botha:** Right. And that’s the reason that Don chose to name Sequoia Sequoia. It wasn’t an accident. He wanted the partnership to outlive him with a lot of consequent behavior and actions. And he also wanted us to invest in companies that stand the taste of time, which I think we’ve done disproportionately. So a couple of things from the offsites, I think one of the most important ones is hubris. The downfall of every Greek tragedy and the extent to which we rest on yesterday’s success. One of my favorite quotes is, “No wreath wilts as fast as one that’s rested on.”
> 
> We cannot rest on the past. And it’s part of what motivated me when I joined Sequoia, by the way, the motto we have inside our building is “You’re only as good as your next investment.” And I saw that hunger and determination from people like Michael Moritz and Doug Leone who clearly made it in life and yet they were relentless in the pursuit. So it’s very important for us as a team to think about hubris. We need to make sure that we continue to meet companies at the earliest stages of formation. So when you go back, when we made, if you think about the history of Sequoia’s investments, when we invested in Atari or Apple or Cisco, we were the first investors.
> 
> They were often single digit numbers of people around the company when we first invested. We invested in YouTube, there were three people, LinkedIn there were seven people, Palo Alto Networks, one founder in our office, incubating him. If we start losing grip of that early stage of being in touch with entrepreneurs right at inception, that’s very dangerous for us. There’s this temptation to then drift downstream and become a late-stage investor. And so that’s probably one of the most important things we talked about in the offsite is we’ve got to make sure that we stay at the fountainhead of company formation.

----

### Look at the multiples. It’s not about the input.

> **Tim Ferriss:** So let me ask a follow up related to that last point. And this may be getting too into the weeds, but I’m curious, early stage investing has become so I would say competitive or at least the field is flooded with players, compared to say 2007 when I first started paying attention to the startup investing world. It’s almost nothing like it was today in terms of competition and the number of just sheer — the sheer number of people willing to write checks in different forms in different fashions. I would imagine with a famous firm with multiple funds, as you get to larger funds sizes, in order to invest at the earliest stages and have those offers be accepted without overdiluting the founders, it seems like you would have to amass an army of people to maybe handle that, to have sufficient capital outflows to make the entire operation work. How did you guys think about solving for still investing at the very early stages as the firm and the funds grew?
> 
> **Roelof Botha:** We don’t want to hire an army of people. Our investment team candidly is about unchanged over the last decade. We only have about two dozen or so investors in our US and Europe business. Because if you want to make good investment decisions, you need to have small decision making groups. Committees don’t make great decisions because then you have average to the mean and great investments depend on outlier instincts. And we are looking for the outlier of founders, the founders who dare to build really exceptional companies, not just investible companies. So we’ve tried to keep the team small.
> 
> We’ve also kept our funds separate. So we have a seed fund that’s distinct from a venture fund that’s distinct from our growth fund. And the teams are lined up against each of those. Because I think what you point out is a real risk. That if you have — I’m just going to make it up. Let’s just suppose you have one pool of capital. You have one $10 billion fund making a $500,000 seed investment and something promising seems kind of irrelevant. It’s a rounding error. And then the whole team starts chasing what they think are bigger investments. And so that’s one of the dangers that we’ve guarded again. So we have separate teams focused on different areas and the key is to look at the multiples. It’s not about the input. 
> 
> Many of these small investments we’ve made have turned into very large gains. It’s not about how much you invest. It’s about the impact it can have. In terms of the competition, by the way, I actually think it’s fantastic that there’s this much competition, because what used to be a cottage industry in the 1980s and 90s, because it wasn’t a big market — I’m not saying that dismissively — it was just that it was a smallish industry — the industry has had to professionalize. The beneficiary of that, ultimately, are the founders, and we’ve had to up our game.
> 
> We had a talent team. When I was still at PayPal, Sequoia had a talent team, but it was one or two people. Now we have 15, and we’re just delivering many more services to startups to help these companies succeed, to give them an unfair edge and a chance of outside success. So, I think it’s really in service of founders. It’s fantastic with businesses that are like this. It makes it more competitive, but it’s all right.

----

### success begets success but it might bias your judgement of tomorrow - Find the right balanace

> **Roelof Botha:** Over a quarter of the NASDAQ were companies that we backed when they were private. No other venture firm comes close. So that is an incredible achievement, and it means that we’re a magnet for other opportunities, often because of sector expertise, or experience. So, because I’m on the board of Unity, I might disproportionately get people who work in VR and AR, because they’re developing on the Unity ecosystem. And so that gives us access to this. So, there is a way in which the industry — success begets success, for sure, but it can also be a curse, because if you have a lot of inbound, are you spending enough time thinking critically about where you want to spend time, with opportunities for tomorrow might lie? And so there’s a danger there that you may spend all of your time just taking inbound opportunities instead of pursuing the best founders and the best companies. So there’s a balance there.

----

### Finding what motivates you

> **Tim Ferriss:** Could you give us — and it doesn’t have to be short, certainly, but I wouldn’t expect you to redeliver any of your presentations — why has Viktor Frankl’s book had such an impact on you? And it is an exceptional book, to be clear, but I’d just love to hear how it resonated with you, or impacted you.
> 
> **Roelof Botha:** I think it reduced, very clearly, the need to think about what motivates you. I mean, the fact that he — I mean, he was in a concentration camp. You’ve obviously read the book, and it’s not a story about the life in the concentration camp, which is horrific, but the fact that he wanted to live. He wanted to survive, because he wanted to recreate his work. His manuscript was taken from him when he was sent to Auschwitz  in the first place. And part of what he learned when he was in the concentration camp was that some people gave up. And that even though the population in the prison was Jewish, the mortality rate actually increased around Christmas and New Year, because it was the marking of time, and a reminder for people that they maybe had no more hope, or if they knew that their family members had died, they gave up.
> 
> And so this idea that “whatever it is that motivates you…” your purpose might be your company. It might be your family. It might be your hobby or whatever it is, but identifying what it is that really motivates you, and leaning into that, and not pretending that you’re actually motivated by fame or fortune or some other superficial motivator, I think, is just incredibly clarifying.

---

### “relentless in pursuit” - if you’re not a little discontent, I don’t think you’re alive. 

> **Tim Ferriss:** I’d like to ask you about a term you used earlier with reference to some of the other general partners at Sequoia, the “relentless in pursuit” piece, and I’d like to ask about this, because one thing I’ve observed in some of my friends who are serial entrepreneurs who have had massive accidents — I mean, they have become wealthy beyond their wildest dreams — is that this “relentless in pursuit,” or a “relentless pursuit,” can produce incredibly good outputs, in terms of objective wealth creation, job creation, solving problems in the world, but it doesn’t always translate. And in fact, it seems sometimes to be inversely correlated to contentedness, or a feeling of peace or happiness. How do you think about — if you do, and maybe the question is just the wrong question — but balancing the relentless pursuit, or counterbalancing it so that you don’t always feel discontent?
> 
> **Roelof Botha:** That’s difficult, because if you’re not a little discontent, I don’t think you’re alive. I mean, it is why people say, “Silicon Valley is dead. Innovation is dead.” Really? There’re so many problems to be solved. As long as there are problems, there are opportunities. So, then for me, I think the people that I found who ended up getting unhappy, it wasn’t because they were still in pursuit of something. It’s actually that the pursuit was over, because it’s the getting, not the having that makes you happy. And so, unfortunately, I’ve seen founders where they’ve had a big exit, and maybe the company was acquired, and what do you do then? And maybe you can borrow from analogies of athletes, often at the peak of their careers when they’re 28 or 32, whatever the case is, but they peak relatively early in their life and then you’re the person who once was that as opposed to what you are now.
> 
> And I think that’s very hard to deal with, but I’ve seen — the Instagram founders who I worked with, got involved with them very early, and they’re just incredibly well adjusted. Company was acquired. It’s been a huge success, massive impact on the world, and the two of them are just building and having fun, and they’ve found all sorts of other pursuits to keep them engaged, and they clearly haven’t suffered from what I described, because they found another outlet for meaning for themselves.

---
### Values is realised more after a few years of IPO  

> **Roelof Botha:** Last year, we conceived of and launched this thing called the Sequoia Capital Fund, and for a long time, I’d been frustrated that the venture capital model was built on this idea of a 10 year, closed end fund cycle. And it was first invented in the late ’60s, early ’70s, and no one had questioned it. And there’s this presumption that, because you have such a short lived fund life, that when the company goes public, you should distribute and move onto the next thing. But the truth is that many of the great companies endure, and they keep compounding.
> 
> And so with most of our companies that have gone public, the majority of their market cap accrued after the IPO, not before the IPO. Square today is worth 10 times what it was worth at the IPO. So, almost definitionally, 90 percent of its market cap was created after the IPO. So, why sell after the IPO? Why leave the board? What about all the other fun company building to be done? I mean, that’s the thing that really floats my boat is working with entrepreneurs to help them build businesses. And for me to have the founder call me and say, “Listen, I’m wrestling with this issue. Can you please help me?” That’s one of the most gratifying things that I have in my job is being able to help on that journey.

---

Pareto principle / The Power Law

> **Roelof Botha:** The “overwhelming majority,” I should say. That’s the case. Obviously, the past is no guarantee of the future, disclaimer, disclaimer, but the thing that’s even more important, and I don’t know if you’ve run across this book by Sebastian Mallaby called _The Power Law_.
> 
> **Tim Ferriss:** It has been recommended to me. I’m sure it’s amazing. His book, _More Money Than God_, on the hedge fund industry, I thought, was exceptional. So I haven’t yet read _The Power Law_, but it’s been recommended too, but please, continue.
> 
> **Roelof Botha:** I’ll second the recommendation. I mean, the reason he chose the title for the book is that our industry follows a power law curve so that there — in our Sequoia funds, I can just cite some of the parameters roughly. In a typical venture fund that has, let’s just say, 35 to 45 companies in a given vintage, in a given fund, we probably have a third of the companies that fail to recover capital, which may mean there’s a complete write off, or it may mean we only realize 50 cents on every dollar we invested, but it’s not a success. Then there is a whole group of companies that have modest success. Maybe you get your money back. Maybe it’s a 2X or a 3X, but what really drives the performance of the fund is the, typically, five to eight companies that end up being 10X companies, 10X returns.
> 
> And the key is that ones get to 10X sometimes run, and they become 55X. They become 100X. They become 200X returns. And so when you have a YouTube, an Airbnb, a Unity, a Snowflake, Palo Alto Networks, WhatsApp, Stripe, Square — you have these companies — they’re completely bowed out on the right-hand side, and so you get a power law curve if you look mathematically. It’s just a very steep curve where a small number of investments really account for the majority of our returns. So, in our history, between five and 15 percent of the investments we make account for over 80 percent of the returns.
> 
> **Roelof Botha:** And so, to your question about holding off to the IPO window, it’s not just that — even if it’s 50-50, whether it goes up or down, it’s, “What’s the asymmetry?” The ones that keep compounding, look at the scale that has been achieved by a company like Google over time. That’s the kind of compounding potential that exists, not with all businesses, clearly. There aren’t too many trillion dollar companies out there, but when you get them right, they can make a big difference.

---

**Roelof Botha:** So, the question I’ll ask founders is — and my partners tease me, because they know that this is my question — and it’s, “What’s the scale of your ambition? What are you aiming to achieve? Are you interested in a company that gets to 100 million in revenue, and that’s the end of your ambition, or do you want to blow past a hundred million in revenue on your way to a billion in revenue?”

**Tim Ferriss:** Quick question, sorry to interrupt. At what point do you ask them this question, because I imagine if it’s in a pitch meeting, they know the right answer, but when are you asking them?

**Roelof Botha:** In a pitch meeting often, and they may not have thought about it, and it’s not to be critical. I mean, often when you’re a founder, if you just found a problem that you’re passionate to solve, but I’m still interested to understand, “Where do you want to take it? Are you trying to build a small company? And again, that’s fine if you want to do that, but we’re looking for outliers who want to build really, really big businesses. That’s the business we’re in, and I want to make sure that there’s an alignment, and that we’re on the same page, that your ambition matches what we’re looking for.”

---

**Roelof Botha:** And you alluded to it. Secondaries are so important. At PayPal, we did a small secondary in 2001 people talk about it as though it’s a recent invention. It was around at 20 years ago, and I remember going from having been a student, still paying off student debt — my net worth was negative in 2001, and we did the secondary, and I think I got $50,000. I mean, I felt rich. I mean, it was transformative. I could actually travel, and I could stay in a hotel, and it was really amazing to have this experience, but the reason I mentioned this is, in this summer of 2001, eBay made a run at us in August, and I think part of what stiffened our backbone was that we had all taken a little bit of money off the table. We were such a young team, and none of us worried about making rent next month, and it was a really important, I think, ingredient to us pursuing the IPO, and getting a far better price.

---

**Tim Ferriss:** Is that something that comes from your own family experience, your cultural upbringing? Is that something you made a point of doing, in terms of fostering these types of relationships after arriving in the US? Where does that come from?

**Roelof Botha:** There’s a talk I listened to from Esther Perel. I don’t know if you know her.

**Tim Ferriss:** I do.

**Roelof Botha:** I met her a couple of years ago, and she talks about how you sometimes grow up in a society, or in a family, where there’s the balance around relationships or transactions. You can imagine, some cultures are very transactional, and you’re fearful, and you’re out on your own, or you’re in a society, or in a family, or a culture that is more nurturing, and it’s more about relationships, and I think I grew up with relationships. And so I think it’s part of the way I grew up that I value those, so I think it’s informed the way that I behave in business too.

---

**Roelof Botha:** I mean we happen to have a company in this space. That’s helping with delivery of CRISPR. But I mean the point is not about investing. It’s about programmability of biology. And it’s the reason I got interested in having us invest in Natera a long time ago, is I was starting to read about genetics. Not having studied biology at college because I went in a different direction. But when the Human Genome Project concluded, it really opened my eyes to what was possible with the information that we have in genetics. And so whether that’s for diagnostic purposes, but now the ability to engineer, to treat disease. And there was just the drug approved today actually for treating bloodborne cancer disease that is reliant on genetic engineering. So this idea that we can treat human disease with precision genetic engineering absolutely blows my mind. So that’s the field that I’d want to study if I had infinite time.

---
### Pre-parade thinking (perhaps first principle it) and revisit assumption 

> **Tim Ferriss:** What did you learn from that? In terms of things that you discounted that you shouldn’t have, things that were invisible that you should have made visible. I’m wondering what you carry forward from that.
> 
> **Roelof Botha:** The two things are imagination, dreaming. Sitting back for a second and saying, and my partner, Mike Moritz, often hammers this home for us in our partner meetings when he was part of the team full time, “What if it goes right? We’re in the business of investing. We’re not in the business of not investing. Assume for a second it goes right, what could you imagine this being?” It’s the pre-parade exercise in some sense. Just put on your thinking caps. I remember being in a meeting with Mike, and Max Levchin, and Jeremy Stoppelman when Yelp was an idea. An idea in 2005. Mike, in a meeting, said, “I imagine a future where there are Yelp stickers outside restaurants.”
> 
> I mean, that was an amazing insight. An amazing vision for the future, which came to be true. And so, I’m always reminded about the need for imagination in our business. The need to be naive at some level. If you become a curmudgeon in the venture business, you’re done. You need to be naive, you need to dream. That’s the one. 
> 
> The second one is learning a little bit from behavioral economics of the need to revisit your assumptions. I was really stuck in a sunk-cost fallacy, where my recommendation was for us to not invest. Wrong decision. Let’s dig my head into the ground, hide, and just keep saying, “We shouldn’t invest. We shouldn’t invest,” because why admit that I was wrong? And so, you need to be able to revisit your decision and admit you were wrong.
> 
> We got the series A at Sequoia wrong. We corrected it, and we paid up for the series B. I helped lead the investment. I had to swallow my pride. “I’m sorry, team. I should have recommended it nine months ago. My bad. Now, we’re paying a higher price for the investment, but I still believe in it. I think there’s huge up sign.” Psychologically, that’s a very difficult thing for people to do, and so we want to create that safety for us in our investment team.

---
### Recover it quicker, get over it. 

> **Tim Ferriss:** We’re going to come back to changing your mind. Before we get to that though, I just want to read something that I think is profound, which I’d never really thought of before. This is from Don Valentine. I am paraphrasing here, but I understand that he said to you at some point, maybe in the interview process, “Successful people join venture capital only to have to face the fact that good investing means taking risks and startups that are more likely than not to fail. Coming to grips with being wrong not five percent of the time, but 30 percent of the time, 40 percent of the time really eats it at your self confidence.” I think that’s a quote from you actually. You had this experience of crying in a partner meeting. Did it continue to be difficult? I suppose I’m wondering if there was a moment, particular company, when you can identify that you became more comfortable with some of your portfolio companies going to zero? Is there anything that helped with that, aside from the support of the partners in that particular meeting?
> 
> **Roelof Botha:** It wasn’t the support of the partners just in that meeting in general. I think we started to have conversations about not doing post-mortems. Because at one point we had an exercise of doing post-mortems on investments. “We got this one wrong. Let’s hammer into each other why we got it wrong.” What does that breed? That breeds a culture where people are going to be scared. Scared to take chances. If you’re dealing in a powerful business with asymmetric upside, why cry over yet another one that failed? You need to focus on the ones that really succeed. That’s where the business is won. Obviously, if all you do is make a dozen investments that don’t work out, then you probably need to go do something else with your time. You need to get enough ones that are good, obviously, to survive.
> 
> That was part of it. We stopped doing post-mortems and we supported each other. It was clear to me that my partners weren’t judging me, and that my head wasn’t on the block for the next failure. I felt secure enough that I could make decisions and knew that I was part of the team. Maybe if you want to use a sport analogy, if you go for a crazy shot, are you going to be cut from the starting team next game? No, because you took a rational shot. It maybe didn’t drop that time. There are probably a million Michael Jordan quotes you can use that make that point. That was one piece. The other one was: At some point, you have enough success, where you realize, “Well, I made an investment that made us $500 million. That excuses three of those failed $5 million investments many times over.”
> 
> You have to get over it. You just psychologically have to accept that you just have to move on from that failure and not have it encumber you. Learn from it. Don’t dismiss it, but you just rationally have to look at the math and go, “Okay, next.” Part of it helped me, by the way. I was in the doldrums in 2009. I actually thought about quitting the business. YouTube was a great success early on in my career. I was incredibly fortunate to have had such a big success within my first three years as a venture investor. Then I had a pretty lean backlog, and I wasn’t sure I was cut out for it. One hit wonder. Is this going to be one and done? I kept at it, and I realized that there’s always another red bat in our industry.
> 
> In 2009, after I thought about it, after my partner Doug, and Mike and Jim really pulled me out of my doldrums, we ended up investing in Unity, Eventbrite, Square, and MongoDB. A list of companies. It was just this purple patch of investing. It just reminded me, “Don’t give up. Keep going.”

---

**Tim Ferriss:** How did they pull you out of your doldrums? What did they say? Do you remember anything specific, even if it’s paraphrased or a rough guesstimate? What did they actually say to you?

**Roelof Botha:** Well, there’s a balance that we have. I’ve now learned, since I’ve been there long enough, to recognize when other people go through this as well. You can’t coddle. You can’t be there with making it too safe, too many boundaries, too many guardrails. People actually have to walk through a little bit of the valley of despair on their own and wrestle with it. But at one point, Jim realized that I was going too far and he would take me for walks around the office.

I don’t remember the specifics of what he talked about, but I remember him spending a lot of time investing in trying to get me into the right space. Then Doug Leone showed up at my house one day with homemade pesto. He was knocking on the door on a Saturday. I, honestly, didn’t feel like opening the door. I was like, “Leave me. I want to be miserable by myself.” Doug knocked. Literally from basil that he grew in his own garden, he brought this little jar of pesto for me, which was delicious, but it was the sign that he was there for me and knew what I was going through. It was memorable and had a big impact.

----

**Roelof Botha:** Yeah, Peter Thiel. Peter came back as our CEO. If you’ve read any of the PayPal books and know the story, we as a team rallied to get him back as CEO. It was difficult, because the board wasn’t fully supportive. As a team, we had to keep interviewing other candidates. We kept feeling, “We’re a team. Peter’s our man. We want Peter to be our leader and CEO.” Peter had incredible ability to change his mind. Peter would say, “We’re turning left, turning left.” If we weren’t sure, we’d go analyze, bring him data. We’d show him the results, and he’d say, “Yep, I’ve just looked at it. We’re turning right.”

He would just turn like that on a dime, and he had no qualms about this. I think most people get so stuck in escalation of commitment where, “I need to remain consistent with the person you thought I was yesterday. Otherwise, I’m going to be viewed as irrational.” There’s a whole branch of psychology that talks about this, right? To some extent, people view flip-floppers negatively, especially in politics and things like that. But in business, it’s incredibly valuable if you’re just rational. Peter did that to a T, and it made him an incredible CEO.

**Tim Ferriss:** Do you think that’s just Peter out of the box? Different motherboard, different programming? Or, is that something that he cultivated? If you think there’s a component of it that is cultivated, how do you think he did that? Or, how would you help someone to develop that ability?

**Roelof Botha:** I obviously didn’t know him growing up. I met him in the PayPal context. I mean, Peter is just so supremely smart and rational. My guess is it’s innate in him. He doesn’t suffer that kind of baggage, if you will. He thinks for himself. There are a lot of people that are so worried about what others think of them, and Peter just doesn’t seem encumbered by that. Not that he’s indifferent to it, but I just don’t think he spends his whole life worrying about what others think about him. He just does what he thinks is right and interesting.

**Roelof Botha:** I think it’s innate. In terms of cultivating it, just calling it for what it is. In an organization, creating a culture where you are willing to stand up to new information and change your mind, and then praising people for changing their mind on things. “Look, I said no to this decision. I’ve reevaluated,” or, “I walked into this partner meeting thinking we shouldn’t make this investment, and I’ve been swayed by your arguments.” Or, recognizing that somebody else changed their mind and praising them for doing that. I think you need to cultivate that kind of culture.

---
### Point estimate judgement (it's like p-value) - short-cuts; decision should be a distributional

> **Tim Ferriss:** I find it so fascinating. I’m going to sit with this. It makes perfect sense, although I have some misgivings, so let’s come back to it. The not doing post-mortems. Psychologically, it makes a lot of sense to me that if you overemphasize post-mortems, you could breed fear in those who you want to take risks. Therefore, it’s self defeating. But I suppose there’s some post-mortem required, at least on an individual level, to change your mind about a company that you said no to, or there’s a revision of your thinking that needs to take place. If any companies come to mind, it doesn’t need to be a specific company, but what is the process that you have gone through to change your mind? To revisit assumptions for any of those investments where you turned down the seed, the series A, and then you end up paying up on the series B or series C?
> 
> **Roelof Botha:** It takes work, by the way. I don’t pretend that it’s easy and that it just comes naturally. I think we’ve evolved with all these heuristics. They maybe served us well 200,000 years ago when we first evolved as a species, but it hampers us today. I have to fight it the whole time. We’ll start discussing a company that I remember meeting nine months prior, and I can just feel my instincts. Like, “No, I didn’t like it then. Why should I like it now? Why do I have to work and think about it again?”
> 
> I mean, the lazy part of me just wants to say, “No. I already made the decision, move on.” Right? It takes effort. It really takes effort, but that’s part of why heuristics are valuable, right? They’re shortcuts. For many things in life, shortcuts are great. But if you want to make important decisions, maybe shortcuts are a curse. Anyway, I don’t make it sound like it just comes naturally. By the way, we do do lightweight post-mortems on the things that failed where we made an investment. It was just that we used to have this exercise, which is the sponsor has to go write a memo and mea culpa, and —

---
### Post-mortem is hard (right people, right chemistry). Otherwise, it would get people PTSD. 

> **Roelof Botha:** It was just too much, it was just too much. We have to learn from them. We got the space right, but we picked the wrong team. “Why did we pick the wrong team?” “Oh, they had better technology, but they didn’t have the right go-to-market capabilities,” or, “They aimed at the wrong part of the value chain.” We try to learn from those, because it informs future decisions. I don’t want to make it sound like we’re oblivious to the mistakes of the past, but it’s then re-looking at a company. I can’t remember when we did this particular analysis, but many of the best investments that happened in particular window of time were companies that we had previously met.

> We’d already met them before. We should be even better prepared to make a good decision now. Why do we not do that? And so, we’ve tried to think about, “Do we ensure that the people who were there before meet them again, because they have a sense of continuity in how far they’ve progressed, but do we also inject some fresh pair of eyes to help guard against the individual who maybe is jaded by their past experience?” Sometimes, we have to switch who the point person is, because some of the chemistry is just between a founder and an investor. It’s a personal relationship. You’re joining somebody’s board. Google is a case in point, where the person who found Google for Sequoia was Doug Leone. The person who became the board member was Mike Moritz, right?

> Mike had the right chemistry with the founders, the right experience because of Yahoo, and that made sense for us. And so, we always try to think about, “What’s the right match? Do we have the right group of people in the room?” At the end of the day, back to the rugby analogy, we have to win as a team. We have to win as a team, which is why things like the Midas List are a little bit insidious from our point of view, culturally, because it tries to create individual attribution. When we have a success at Sequoia, when there’s a company that goes public or gets acquired, we actually write an email internally and we enumerate all the people that contributed to the success of the company, not just the person whose name is nominally attached to it as the board member.

---

### maintaining tension between individualism and teamwork. It’s not either/or, it’s and

> **Roelof Botha:** When I say what I did, it doesn’t mean that other models don’t work. For us, it’s what works repeatably. Even in our own business, there are examples where an individual partner has an idea, forms a connection with a particular team, and can bring that entire opportunity home. Then that partner probably is most of the interface for that company, in terms of company building, board building, and things like that, and we want to encourage that. Actually, at Sequoia, one of our cultural frameworks is maintaining tension between individualism and teamwork. It’s not either/or, it’s and. We want both. You need to stick your neck out, you need to do exceptional work, you need to be accountable for what you do. But you also need to be supportive as a team member, because that’s part of why we’ve been able to endure as a partnership. It’s both.
> 
> Can you do incredibly well as an individual or a collection of individuals? Absolutely. But the cultural consistency for us inside our organization is, we need that for us to consistently do well. To give you an example: We’ve built internal systems now for us to track companies. If you give me a company name, I could look it up and I could tell you, “Have we met it? Who met it? What are the notes? What did they think of the company?” I have data science signals that tell me how this company is doing. The proprietary to give me a sense of whether or not it’s worth pursuing. These are things that didn’t exist in our industry 15 years ago. Actually, Jim Goetz was one of the first ones to help us pioneer with this. He built a system called Early Bird, which is part of how we identified WhatsApp.

---

### Dare to dream. It's OK to fail a number of times so long you manage to hit one. 

> **Roelof Botha:** — time to think about it beforehand. My answer would be, “Dare to dream.” The reason I say that is, actually, when I interviewed at PayPal, and Peter interviewed me, part of what he talked about is people’s failure to understand repeat gains. If I told you to take a chance in your career with one role of the dice, proverbially, it’s pretty dicey to do that. No pun intended. But instead, I told you, “Look, you have one shot. If it doesn’t work out, there’s another one and another one and another one.” You have many at-bats, so to speak. You have many different opportunities for different companies over your career.
> 
> Would you take a chance on something that has a low probability of success, and that’s fun along the way? Yeah, sure. You would. And so, I saw so many of my classmates — I’ve seen so many people over the years make safe decisions, play it safe. They make these conservative decisions. “Oh, I can’t take a chance on this thing. What if this company fails?” They just end up getting in a rut. Before you know it, they’re in their forties. They have a midlife crisis. They feel that they’ve wasted their lives. And so, dare to dream. Take a chance. Just do something interesting. Just think, “If it doesn’t work out, then there’s something else. There’s something else.” Just keep taking more chances.
> 
> **Roelof Botha:** No, absolutely. The most boring thing is a life left unexamined, right?
> 
> **Roelof Botha:** If it’s fun, who cares? You’ve had so much success. I mean, no one remembers you for your failures, by the way. Can you numerate the six companies, seven companies that I invested in that were complete write-offs? Probably not, but you remember the ones that made it, right?